+++
title = "Creative Mesocycles"
description = "A methodology for planning creative work"

# TODO: replace with publication date
date = 2025-01-12

draft = true

[taxonomies]
tags = ["life", "productivity", "mental health"]
+++

In 2024 I made two intentional changes to my habits: I started exercising every
day, and I stopped working on creative projects that take more than a month.
Both of these changes have improved my life immensely. Moreover, I have
discovered that my one-month blocks of creative work rhyme in an uncanny way
with a concept from sports periodization called the Mesocycle[^1].

## Creative Periodization

When I committed to only doing 1-month creative projects last year, it was in
some ways a declaration of bankruptcy. The truth is that I commit to projects at
a far more rapid pace than I complete them, leading to a complete oversaturation
of my time. I was burnt out, depressed, and buried in over-ambitious game
development and woodworking ideas that I had long ago lost any passion for.

Despite the circumstances, making things was still meaningful to me. Some days I
was so depressed that even watching TV sounded overwhelming, but somehow I would
still want to noodle on some code. This wasn't sustainable though: those
projects were still burning me out, even as I noodled on them. I would sink into
my work on them, neglecting other more important parts of my life even as I
failed to make meaningful progress.

My compromise with myself was to set a time limit. I could keep making things,
but whether they succeeded or failed, after a month I would need to move on to
something else. I would try to choose things that I thought I could get done in
a month, but if I lost interest or the project petered out, no problem. Just
take it as a data point, pull the plug and move on.

## Sports Periodization

When accomplished athletes complete, they often plan in terms of yearly training
cycles leading up to the major yearly competition. This yearly cycle is broken
down into smaller periods of focused training through the process of sports
periodization.

Under this paradigm, the yearly cycle of training for an event is known as a
macrocycle. This is broken down into mesocycles of 3-6 weeks, which focus on a
particular aspect of training such as strength or endurance. A mesocycle
consists of microcycles (typically about a week) that are a specific training
routine. If you've ever done a weekly weight lifting routine, that routine is
your microcycle.

While there are some
[valid criticisms](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sports_periodization#Opposition_to_periodization)
of traditional sports periodization, it also has a long track record as a viable
training methodology because it provides a straightforward structure for
athletes to work within. The intermediate breakdown into mesocycles allows them
on their long-term goals without becoming overwhelmed by the complexity. It can
be crudely summarized simply as "if you have a competition in a year, prioritize
the things you need to work on, and work on them one at a time in 3-6 week
blocks. Within that block, repeat a weekly routine that improves your focus
area. Use that time wisely though: you only have about a month to make the
progress you need."

## Mesocycles are a Sweet Spot

Hopefully the resemblance is obvious. Sports and creative arts are both
endeavors where motivated people invest a lot of hard work to develop their
capacities, but ultimately the only thing that makes them worthwhile is love for
the activity.

After learning more about sports periodization, I came to view my little 1-month
projects as **_Creative Mesocycles_**.

Given shape through a name, Creative Mesocycles stepped into my world fully
reified, laden with thing-ness. I could not help but gush about them. As
newfound things, I found them to have the following essential qualities:

1. **Scope negotiation:** If I listen to the artist in my brain, he will want to
   craft a magnum opus every time. He will have more ideas than I could ever
   test, much less execute. However if I gently say "yes, but you only have a
   month. What could be done to point a finger at this vision?" then I find this
   artist in my head to be pleasantly amenable to a smaller project that
   captures only the most compelling and essential (usually with a degree of
   charming jank).

2. **Singular Focus:** Once the cycle has started, it is easy to hold focus for
   the month knowing that the time is so short. When I inevitably have ideas for
   a newer, better project halfway through, I can tell myself "that's great. do
   it next month if you feel like it". When I inevitably suffer setbacks or
   become disillusioned, I can tell myself "just do your best. There's only a
   week or two left."

3. **Time Boxing:** At the end of the month, what's done is done. Sometimes the
   project is incomplete. Even when it is complete, I'm usually over it by then,
   and want desperately to move on to something else. I like the finality of the
   self-imposed deadline: sometimes I learn that what I wanted to do couldn't be
   accomplished in a reasonable timeframe.
4. **Reflection:** There's always so much to learn at the end of each mesocycle.
   I postmortem the project to myself, figuring out what went wrong and right.
   Then the best part: figuring out what to work on next. I'm always surprised
   and delighted by how different it is from what I expected. I can never
   predict at the beginning of a month what I will want to work on at the end,
   so now, I don't even try.

I also think that the 1-month timespan holds a special significance:

1. This is about the minimum time I need to actually finish any particular big
   rock such as a complex feature or game-jam prototype.
2. This is about the maximum time I can remain inspired by an active project
   before I start to burn out or get distracted.
3. This is about the maximum time I can go without getting some sort of big win
   before I get demoralized by the whole affair.
4. This is about the maximum time I can plan ahead in fine detail for a project.

Of course, I don't expect this to hold true for everybody across all creative
disciplines. I think that if you want to adopt this schema of work, you should
tweak it to fit what makes sense for you. Personally, I think I am going to
experiment with some 6-week mesocycles in 2025, so that I can tackle slightly
larger projects and maybe write some blog posts about them. The last thing I
want anyone to take from this article is the notion that what works for me has
to work for them.

## A Foundation of Daily Habit and Enjoyment

This regimen worked out more splendidly than I could have hoped. It forced me
into a dialogue with myself about what would be _fun_ to work on for a month,
and what my life _needed_. The work shifted from servicing an idea or a vision,
and allowed me to choose the work would be the most nourishing thing for me. If
I was burnt out on games, I could may a small AI tool, or build a piece of
furniture. There was no pressure - one month was barely enough time for me to
accomplish anything at all.

Nonetheless, I think it was the most creatively productive year I've ever had. I
made two games for game jams, I built an assistive AI tool that helps me with
D&D worldbuilding, I ran a one-off D&D adventure, I helped organize a wedding
(my own), I hosted my first game jam, and launched this blog. All of this
emerged organically as I bounced from passion to passion.

**If macrocycles are built on mesocycles, and mesocycles are built on
microcycles, then microcycles are built on daily habit and enjoyment.** At the
end of the day, the only reason to do unnecessary work in your free time is
because those hours spent add to your life. If the art you do is draining you or
destroying you, then for fuck's sake, please do anything else.

I think that the most important thing that working in mesocycles did for me was
allow me to reconnect with that enjoyment I feel when I make something. If you
are interesting in adopting this methodology, I would urge you to stay in close
touch with your own enjoyment and sense of play.

I found a therapist I like, had a great wedding, and will hopefully live happily
ever after.

## Future Work

I think that in 2025 I want to work on a bigger game project. My brain is in a
much healthier place, and it's feeling like I can finally tackle something like
that. I am thinking of this as my new, more focused macrocycle, and it will be
interesting to adapt my current schema of mesocycles into it.

I suspect that every now and then I will have to have a "resting cycle" where I
go off and work on something completely different just for the variety. Or maybe
I will start playing with the idea of "rest days", and work in planned days of
distraction to my weekly schedule. I'm not entirely sure yet - we'll have to
play around with it and stay on our toes. In general, I'm fascinated by this
idea of treating my creative time like a workout regimen, and I'm sure I'll have
more to share as things progress.

I also want to write about my progress as I go, which is why I started this
blog. I hope to start a youtube channel in the coming months as well, and
publish devlogs as well as some companion videos for these essays.

[^1]:
    From latin / greek,
    [meaning "middle cycle"](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/mesocycle).
